


If Aristophanes, writing at the peak of the Pleponesian war, was a nostalgic for the “good old days” of peace and Pericles, he was certainly not alone. Indeed, jaundiced nostalgia seems to have been an endemic Greek condition. The old myth of the “Golden Age of Men”, prior to the opening of Pandora’s Box, characterizes the past as superior in wealth and health to one’s own. Hesiod notably wrote about the “degenerate” men of his day; while Sophocles often contrasted the old Homeric heroes with the lesser men of today. Depictions like the Iliad’s of the hero Diomedes—who supposedly could “lift twice that of any man alive today”—can be taken as evidence that the Greeks looked forlornly to the past. 

Aristophanes’ apparent brand of nostalgia was for a more recent time, however; specifically Athens at the end of the war with Persia, after wins at Marathon and Salamis left the city state in the position of Aegean hegemony. The poet’s dislike of the current radical “demagogues”, paired with his distaste for endless war and the rhetorical Sophistry so in vogue with the nouveau riche, certainly aid a portrait of a pessimistic Aristophanes. However, I argue that the default reading of the poet as a nostalgic—and by extension an opponent of radical democracy—is sometimes on unsound footing. Likewise, while the poetic trappings of nostalgia are easy to identify, their broader significance in terms of Aristophanes’ politics are harder to pinpoint. 

But first, let’s explore the ways nostalgia for a more utopian past appears in Attic Old Comedy. There are two main lines of analysis. For one, Aristophanes’ characters speak fondly of the specific circumstances surrounding Marathon and Pericles. So, for example, “Mr. Good Reason” (a nomenclature indicative of the poet’s favor, surely) reminds “Mr. Bad Reason” that: “it was along these lines that the men of Marathon were bred, whereas you, you teach our young men to muffle up in greatcoats.” Meanwhile, the jurors of Wasp’s chorus—characterized as “Attic wasps”—utilizes the zoomorphism to compare their Marathon-era “ferociousness” and “renown” with their current state, beholden to Cleon, “buzzing around the Ekelesia… stinging everyone in sight [law courts].” These men, it seems, have in their capitulation to the demagogues, been almost emasculated. The Chorus leader talks of a time “when men were men”—while, of course, “not one of us could make a speech.”

The second angle appears in Frogs, one of the first works of literary criticism in the Western canon. The conceit of the comedy is Dionysus’ katabasis to Hades to bring back a poet to advise the Demos out of its Pleponesian predicament. Dionysus’ construction as a character is itself reflective of the supposedly dire state of modern tragedy, as opposed to the works of the dead poets. He opens the play walking, besides his slave Xanthias who is on a donkey. This apparently “off” power dynamic is befuddled by Dionysus’ costume, a “feminine” imitation of Heracles. The god of Athenian theatre, clearly, is in a “funk.” In the Agon, Aeschylus and Euripides argue over whose poetry is better, and who is more deserving of resurrection. There is a definite old/new caricature. Aeschylus, the more traditional tragedian, prays to Demeter; Euripides prays to the modern, empiricist gods of the senses “oh, nose, oh ears…” Ultimately, Aeschylus triumphs, and is lead back to Athens by Dionysus.  This particular dramatic paradigm—the resurrection of a dead statesman to solve Athen’s current predicament—is not unique to Aristophanes. Euripides, in his earlier play, brings back Pericles himself. 

While his characters, at least, see the past as a time of greater, more masculine moral constitution, as well as superior drama, Aristophanes’ own views are more murky. An important question in particular is: was Aristophanes any more partial for the old jurors than Bdelycleon, who would deny them their three Obols? It it clear the Aristophanes see Philocleon as being in the wrong—the anti-Cleon sentiment is omnipresent in his entire dramatic catalogue—but he does posses a strong comic poneria that makes him instantly likable. Bdelycleon may be in the right, yet he is dry, unfunny, certainly no comic hero. The later half of the play, that focuses on the forced “modernization” of Philocleon—entails his entrance into the circles of the likes of Cleon; Bdelycleon teaches him how to walk and talk like a refined modern. It is clear from his description of the “effeminate” movements Bdelycleon expects of Philocleon that while he may be correct on the law courts, he is not a return to the more masculine Marathon days. 

This complicated characterization in Wasps is mainly why I think the dichotomy that springs up between the Old and the New is less about Aristophanes choosing sides than him presenting a behavioral critique of Athen’s irreconcilable tribalism.  Bdelycleon remarks, at one point, that he can barely “buy cheese at the market” without being slurred as a “monarchist” who wants to bring Athens to “tyranny.” Since there is no consistency to Aristophanes’ moralizing favor; perhaps he presents instead a parable. Philocleon cannot mould his comic spirit to modern life;  despite abandoning his “Judicial-mania”, his attempts to tell the “refined anecdotes” of Cleon’s clique fail, as he is accused of stealing. The father and son of Wasps thus seem stuck in an incorrigible dance. Athens, too, is bitterly and irreconcilably divided. 

The “behavioural” as opposed to “political” reading of Wasps expands into a characterization of Aristophanes as a kind of “agnostic” on the matters of radical democracy. That is to say, he was opposed to the radical democrats not simply for their politics but for their method of governance; it was messy, divisive and indecisive. His message in the Wasps, for example, is less that the courts must be reformed than that a citizen would be better to simply leave them alone. The courts are a means of monetary manipulation, an effective old age pension that keeps the likes of Philocleon—once a brave Attic fighter—within the hold of the demagogues. But even the reading of Philocleon and Bdelycleon’s status in a utopian old/new paradigm is complicated. Bdelycleon is clearly the wiser, more reserved of the two; Philocleon is the childish clown. At one point, Philocleon even remarks ironically: “I’m his only father, you know — he’s over protective. When I’m older I’ll have more independence.”  

Lateiner 1982 has written that Aristophanes embodies an “important,if controversial, disinclination for politics common that was in vogue among the aristocratic classes.” Indeed, Aristophanes’ full name was Aristophanes Philippou Kudathenaieus—the middle name meaning “he who loves horses”, a title, we deduce, only appropriate for a family rich enough to own a horse. Aristophanes, thus, sees the courts, Philocleon, Bdelycleon, the chorus and all as psychological actors in a grand dynamic of division and tribalism. He looks to the “good old days” less out of elitism or even emasculation, than out of a desire for a less divided Athens; he sees both the Pleponesian war and the rise of the Sophists as factors dividing families from themselves. 

Now we have this new reading—of Aristophanes lamenting Athens’ division rather than its modernity—it pays to return to the Frogs. While Dionysus does ultimately choose the traditionalist Aeschylus, it is by no means a clear winner. Each poet gets equal air time; Euripides righty pointing out that Aeschylus’ characters lack relatability, Aeschylus responding that Euripides’ characters are not inspiring, and so on. In the end, when asked to give the people of Athens some advice, Aeschylus first rambles some dispensable aphorism.   

But there is a final layer to this discussion of Aristophanes’ nostalgia, and that is provided by Archarnians and Clouds. While Aristophanes clearly sees the development of radical democracy and its manipulative speeches as a negative development, it may be a mistake to see him as contemptuous of the ordinary citizen. 

As Zumberunnen points out in Political Theory, the Cleon of Thucydides often makes the condescending claim that the ideal Athenian citizen is an “ignorance” but “restrained” one, not a “clever” yet “reckless” one. This expands, with this Cleon’s reference to speeches and public rhetoric, into a view of citizens as valuable and honorable for their stupidity. Aristophanes presents a very different view of the ordinary citizen, and, by extension, his own politics regarding the gradual “degeneracy” of Athens. Diceapolis is clearly that “ordinary citizen”;  as he waits for the Assembly, he retells how: “I sigh, I yawn, I stretch myself, I fart, I fiddle, I scribble, pluck my beard, do sums.” There is no sophistication to this character. The key is that  Diceapolis has come to the Assembly with a political message; he advocates for peace and an end to the Peloponnesian war—that is to say, an “honorable peace” with Sparta. Here is Cleon’s very archetypical ordinary citizen taking politics into his own hands; indeed, for a cause Aristophanes sympathizes with. 

From this, I conclude that is Aristophanes was not a Radical Democrat, he was perhaps a radical democrat. As Sitwell argues in his book “Aristophanes the Democrat”, the Clouds can be read as a defense of the radical democrat Hyperbolus. To say that Aristophanes was purely opposed to the more democratic politics of the now is as a result incorrect. He saw some personal agency in the ordinary citizen Diceapolis, he sees valor in both Philocleon and Bdelycleon. While it may be tempting to paint his apparent nostalgia for the Periclean past as a sign of his aristocratic, monarchic tendencies, the real picture is more nuanced, messy and complicated. Much like, I imagine, 4th century BCE Athens itself. 



