


Traditional critical readings of Chuck Palanuick’s Fight Club have focussed on the proto-fascist gender politics of the book. I argue that a greater awareness of both the so-called “Millennium moment” in which the book was set, and its tautological narrative structure, illuminates the more thematically crucial temporal politics of the story, in which the paradoxical ennui of post-scarcity Liberal democracy is presciently revealed. 

In order to connect Palanuick’s narrative structure to its manufactured temporal psychology, we must first consider the wider socio-political landscape of the book’s historical setting. The 90s, the first post-Cold War decade, saw rise to a radical kind of neoliberal hubris. The American political scientist Francis Fukuyama published an influential book declaring that the fall of the Soviet Union had established liberal democracy as the “final form of human social organisation.” Fukuyama declared, in essence, the “End of History.” Strongest in the late 90s, the underlying social headwinds of Fukuyama’s theory worked to entrench a societal feeling central to postmodernity: the “perpetual present.” Liberal governments, free from the ideological challenge of communism, were confined to managerial, rather than transformative, politics. The rise of credit ended a culture of saving; replacing it with one of continuous spending, in which the default was always one day away. The literature of the time bolstered this new historiography with an increasing use of pastiche; in which the cultural trends of the paste merge into a single gestalt. In sum, the grand narratives of the 20th century collapsed, as politics consolidated and history “ended.”

Palanuick begins his book with what appears to be a flash forward, as his unnamed protagonist is threatened, gun in hand, by Tyler Durden, the narrator’s disassociated identity; a Nietzschean Übermensch. The two characters, who are really one character, gaze out from the top of the Parker Morris banking building, sitting a top tons of explosives that will bring the city’s banking industry to the literal ground. The flash forward ends, and the subsequent chapters skip back in chronological time to the Narrator’s earlier life as a white-collar worker for a car conglomerate. The forward, linear progression of time continues, as the Narrator “meets” Tyler, founds Fight Club and its anarchic twin Project Mayhem, leading the reader, ultimately, towards the same initial scene, a top the Parker Morris building. This narrative formulation is cyclical, but it is also, crucially, tautological. Palanuick’s beginning is his end; the novel begins and ends with the same helpless scene, in which the Narrator is threatened by himself. What this tautological achieves is an undermining of the Narrator’s supposed revolutionary character development, as he leaves behind his job and his insomnia to take part in Fight Club’s proto-fascist counterculture, defeating the “emasculation” of Late Capitalism. But as beginning becomes end, we realise that no such character progress has really been made; Palanuick’s men are stuck living out a perpetual present. 

My reading of this narrative structure is supported by the character’s self-described ennui. Tyler Durden frequently speaks of his followers’ need for the Grand Narratives of history the late 20th century refuses to provide. He calls his men the “middle children of history”—“No purpose or place. We have no Great War. No Great Depression. Our Great War’s a spiritual war…and our Great Depression is our lives.” Palanuick’s characters suffer from a temporal disillusionment; the promises of the likes of Fukuyama, that history had ended, deny the revolutionary fervour the Narrator and his like feel validated by. For the white, middle class characters that populate Fight Club, a credit-backed post-scarcity utopia has really arrived, and they hate it. It’s material comfort (the Narrator often speaks lovingly of his Ikea collection) is hollow, as it denies its citizens a goal or a purpose. As the narrative tautology undermines the superficial revolutionary self-actualisation of the Narrator, we grow aware of this postmodern paradox. The Narrator’s purported enemy—the credit card companies—is not the important signifier. Instead, as Lacan said, “the subject loves his symptom more than himself.” Lacking a Grand Narrative, Fight Club’s men express their revolutionary sentiment; it does not matter who the enemy is. In this way, Palanuick is really diagnosing a social malaise endemic to Late Capitalism. He presages, perhaps, the rioters who stormed the US Capitol earlier this year—white, middle class, materialistically “fine.” But, raised on the propaganda of revolution, they feel betrayed by their place in history; born too late to fight in a just cause, they fight against it. 

Palanuik’s Fight Club captures a temporal ennui endemic to the Millennium moment. Through his cyclical narrative structure, he conveys the purposelessness of his characters; he undermines his characters’ revolutionary journey by placing it against a perpetual present in which actions become tautologies. The opponents in his characters’ revolution thus looses their importance, as we realise that they are fighting for the pure sake of fighting, wishing to place themselves within the Grand social Narrative they so dearly lack. 

 
 
